10.5.0 (1 March 2010):
	The WFDB library now supports signals with 24 and 32 bits of precision,
	using new formats 24 and 32. Note that these formats, unlike all
	previously defined formats, require more than 16 bits per sample value.
	If the WFDB software is compiled on a 16-bit platform (unusual except
	for embedded processors), the excess high bits of signals in these
	formats are not read on input, and they are replaced by zeroes on
	output, unless the WFDB_Sample data type has been redefined as 'long'
	(in wfdb.h).  This is not done by default since it would increase
	memory and computational requirements unnecessarily in embedded
	applications that do not require 24- or 32-bit precision.

	Since support for extended precision samples cannot be introduced
	without this limitation in backward compatibility for 16-bit platforms,
	the minor version number of the library has been incremented to 5.
	Most users will not be affected by this change, however, apart from the
	new functionality it provides.

	Memory allocation macros that have been defined previously in wfdblib.h
 	have been moved to wfdb.h so they are accessible to WFDB applications,
	including user-written applications.  See the WFDB Programmer's Guide
	for additional information about these macros (MEMERR, SFREE, SUALLOC,
	SALLOC, SREALLOC, and SSTRCPY).

	Some combinations of options caused the version of 'wrsamp' included
	in version 10.4.25 to fail;  this has now been corrected.

	WAVE's Find window now provides a means to search for the next valid
	sample of a specified signal.

10.4.25 (21 January 2010):
	WFDB application 'rdsamp' can now write CSV (comma-separated value)
	format output using its new '-c' option, and 'wrsamp' can read CSV
	format input.  If no input columns are specified, 'wrsamp' converts
        all of them.  If the input contains signal names, units, or timestamps,
        'wrsamp' saves them in the header file it creates.  'wrsamp' also has
        two new options ('-O', to select the output format, and '-z', to
        suppress output of column 0).

	WFDB application 'sigamp' has new options for printing individual
	measurements.

	The script 'install-wave32', used to build and install a 32-bit version
        of WAVE on some 64-bit platforms, has been updated so that it can be
	used on Fedora 12 (as well as on previously supported platforms).

	In WFDB library versions 10.4.5 through 10.4.24, strtim("e") did not
	work properly when the open input record was an EDF file and high
	resolution input mode had not been selected.  This problem has been
	corrected.

10.4.24 (28 October 2009):
	A possible string overflow in nst.c has been corrected.  Thanks to
	Virginia Faro-Maza for finding and reporting this problem.

	Recent versions of the Xorg (X11 Window System) server freeze when
	applications that use XView (such as WAVE) 'grab' the mouse pointer.
	Thanks to Michael Buro, who supplied a run-time workaround for this
	problem that can be used with any XView application to disable pointer
	grabs.  Pointer grabs are now permanently disabled in WAVE. 

10.4.23 (7 August 2009):
	Several changes in lib/signal.c eliminate unintended interactions that
	occurred in previous versions between the input modes that can be
	selected using setgvmode().  The effects of these interactions were
	first observed in newly written code; existing WFDB applications were
	apparently unaffected.

	On Cygwin/Windows, the WFDB library is now installed in both /usr/bin
	and /usr/lib, to simplify building user applications that use the WFDB
	library and to simplify running compiled WFDB applications outside of
	the Cygwin environment.
	
	In some cases, previous versions of WFDB application 'rxr' entered
	an infinite loop and did not produce any output if one of the annotation
	files being compared ended during an episode of atrial fibrillation.
	Thanks to Mathias Gruber, who reported the problem and provided a test
	case that made it possible to find and fix this bug.

	WFDB application 'wrann' now handles input files containing annotation
	mnemonics that it does not recognize by writing the corresponding
	annotations as comment annotations, with the unrecognized mnemonics
	inserted at the beginning of the 'aux' fields in the output annotations.
	(Previous versions of 'wrann' discarded any such input annotations.)

	WFDB application 'rdedfann' now preserves the full time resolution of
	annotations it extracts from EDF+ input files, and it replaces any
	whitespace in those annotations with underscores (_).  Coupled with
	the changes in wrann described above, it is now possible to use these
	two applications to create a WFDB-compatible annotation file from the
	annotations in an EDF+ file without manual intervention.

10.4.22 (28 July 2009):
	When reading multifrequency records in WFDB_LOWRES mode, invalid
	sample values occurring in signals that need to be decimated were
	not always handled properly in WFDB library function getvec(),
	resulting in spurious artifacts during intervals that contained a
	mixture of valid and invalid samples.  This bug has been corrected;
	thanks to Omar Abdala for a report that brought this problem to light.

        A declaration for WFDB library function findsig() has been added
        to wfdb.h.  Thanks to Thomas Heldt for reporting a warning
        that resulted from its omission in previous versions.

	Omar also found and corrected a bug in app/wabp.c that resulted in
	premature termination of processing some variable-layout multisegment
	records, and improved the autoselection of a default ABP signal.

	An uninitialized variable in convert/mit2wav.c caused problems in
	previous versions;  thanks to Greg Downs for the bug report and fix.

	WFDB application 'wrann' from the previous two versions truncated
	'aux' strings containing embedded whitespace;  this has been corrected.
	Thanks to Mauro Villarroel for the bug report.

10.4.21 (14 May 2009):
	Changes in lib/Makefile.tpl were needed in order to pass configuration
	constants to the functions added to wfdbio.c in 10.4.20, but were
	omitted from that release;  they have been included in this version.

	Several changes in WAVE, including an option (accessible from the View
	panel) to display valid signals only, have been designed to provide
	more convenient access to variable-layout records such as those in the
	MIMIC II Waveform Database.

10.4.20 (4 May 2009):
	WFDB application 'snip' can now create excerpts of multi-segment
	records that preserve the segmentation of the original records.

	WFDB application 'wrann' now determines output annotation times using
	the first column of input, if the first column appears to contain
	absolute times rather than elapsed times; otherwise, it uses the sample
	numbers in the second column, as in previous versions.

	WFDB application 'rdsamp' now handles long units strings more cleanly.
	
	Several new functions have been added to lib/wfdbio.c, to make
	configuration constants accessible at run time;  these are needed
	by the WFDB Toolkit for Matlab.  wfdb-config.c has been rewritten to
	use several of these functions, and has been moved from lib to app.

10.4.19 (26 March 2009):
	pschart and psfd now handle signal names in their command-line argument
	lists (following the '-s' option).

 	The version of wfdb2mat included in this release generates a .mat file
 	of the expected size even if the input ends prematurely.  Thanks to
 	Weixiang Liu for a report that prompted this revision.

10.4.18 (15 March 2009):
	The WFDB library no longer reports spurious checksum errors when reading
	EDF files, which don't have checksums.

	WFDB application wfdb2mat now correctly handles EDF input records, so
	it is now possible to use it to convert EDF to .mat format directly.

10.4.17 (5 March 2009):
	Internal WFDB library function wfdb_checkname() now allows hyphens
	(-) within record and annotator names.

	WFDB applications xform and wfdb2mat now properly handle variable-layout
	multisegment input records.

10.4.16:
	WFDB library function strtim() now rounds rather than truncating when
	the sampling frequency is not an integer.

	WFDB application wrann is now (slightly) less fussy about its input
	and no longer requires the tab character preceding an aux string to
	occur in a specific column as did earlier versions.

	Bug fixes in convert/wfdb2mat.

10.4.15:
	WFDB library function mstimstr() now outputs time to the nearest
	millisecond, rather than truncating its calculation to the nearest
 	lower number of milliseconds.

	A new WFDB library function, wfdbputprolog(), can write a prolog at the
	beginning of a signal file.  WFDB applications ignore embedded prologs.

	A new WFDB application, convert/wfdb2mat, can convert all or part of
	a WFDB-compatible signal file into a Matlab-compatible .mat file that
	remains readable by WFDB applications.

10.4.14:
	WFDB library function setwfdb() now exports the WFDB library
	environment variables (WFDB, WFDBCAL, WFDBANNSORT, and WFDBGVMODE) on
	all modern platforms, so that a process started by a WFDB application
	inherits the WFDB environment of its parent.  (This is not possible on
	platforms that do not provide a working putenv() function, such as
	MacOS 9 and earlier, and 16-bit versions of MS-Windows.)  Some previous
	versions also included this capability, but the older implementation
	caused a memory leak, and it was disabled in version 10.4.6.  Thanks to
	Omar Abdala and Dan Scott for reporting the problem and help in
	identifying its cause.

	A new WFDB application, wfdbtime, is convenient for use in scripts to
	convert among absolute and elapsed times and times in sample intervals.

10.4.13:
	A new WFDB library function, tnextvec(), finds the next valid sample
	from a chosen signal, occurring at or after a specified time.  This
	function is particularly useful when reading variable-layout
	multi-segment records that may have lengthy gaps in signals of
	interest.

	For portability, the WFDB library has always stored parameters such as
	sampling frequency and gain as strings rather than as floating-point
	numbers.  Although the resultant loss of precision has been almost
	always negligible, it has been observable in the specific case of
	converting very large time intervals from sample intervals to seconds,
	when the sampling frequency in Hz cannot be represented exactly in
	binary (e.g., if the sampling frequency is once per minute, or 1/60
	Hz).  This situation cannot be wholly avoided, but it can be minimized.
	Changes in this release, in setheader() and in functions that record
	time units in annotation files, increase the precision with which
	non-integer parameters are recorded, so that loss of precision as a
	result of converting them to and from strings should almost never be
	observable.

	Several options have been added to rdsamp, which can now print the
	time of each sample in a variey of formats, and can use the new
	tnextvec() function (see above) to search for valid samples of a
	signal of interest.

10.4.12:
	The rule for sorting annotations within a file has been changed to
	allow a much larger number of simultaneous annotations (i.e.,
	annotations in a given annotation file with identical 'time' fields)
	than was previously possible.  Since version 6.1, the WFDB library
	sorts simultaneous annotations according to the value of their 'chan'
	fields, allowing for 256 simultaneous annotations at any given time.
	Beginning in version 10.4.12, the library sorts simultaneous
	annotations according to their 'num' fields, then sorts those with
	identical 'num' fields according to their 'chan' fields, allowing up to
	65,536 simultaneous annotations at any given time.

	A new WFDB library function, findsig(), returns the signal number
	of the input signal matching its string argument, or -1 if no such
	input signal exists.  If the string argument could be interpreted
	as an input signal number, it is taken as such;  otherwise, the
	string argument must be an exact match to a signal name ("desc"
	field in the siginfo structure).

	WFDB applications calsig, pschart, psfd, rdsamp, sqrs,
	sqrs125, wabp, wqrs, and xform now accept signal names in any
	context in which an input signal number can be given.

	The install-wave32 script now installs 32-bit libgcc and Open Look
	glyph fonts if they are missing, as by default in Fedora 10.

	Previous versions of WFDB library function setifreq() entered an
	infinite loop if invoked (contrary to specifications) before
	opening an input record.  setifreq() now detects the error, emits
	an appropriate warning, and returns.

	If a WFDB application that uses WFDB library version 10.4.5
	through 10.4.11 attempted to read an annotation file before
	reading the sampling frequency of the associated record (for
	example, by invoking isigopen() or sampfreq()), the annotation
	times might all appear to be zero.  This may occur when
	reading annotations created using WFDB 10.4.5 or later.  The
	times supplied when creating the file are correctly written
	but may be incorrectly read in these cases.  This problem was
	corrected in this release; thanks to Thomas Heldt for
	reporting it and providing a reproducible example of it.
	
10.4.11:
	Build process improvements, especially on Cygwin and MinGW targets.

10.4.10:
	EDF digital maximum and minimum values are now read properly in 64-bit
	builds;  previous versions had a bug in edfparse (an internal WFDB
	library function defined in lib/signal.c) that did not appear in
	32-bit builds.  A similar bug was also corrected in convert/edf2mit.
	Thanks to Joe Mietus for reporting the problem.

	Using a block size that is not a power of 2 with the "-n" and "-N"
	options of "fft" now works properly (although powers of 2 are still
	recommended for best results).  Thanks again to Joe Mietus for
	reporting the problem and valuable assistance in correcting it.

	The "-f" option now works properly in ann2rr (previous versions
	worked only if "-t" was also provided).

10.4.9:
	The "configure" script is now non-interactive by default.  A new
	"-i" option selects interactive mode.

	The new "install-wave32" script simplifies installation of WAVE on
	64-bit Linux.

	The WFDB library once again correctly interprets a hyphen ('-')
	(used in place of a record name, annotator name, signal file name,
	or calibration file name) as a reference to the standard input or
        output, for platforms that support POSIX standard I/O;  see section
        5.2, "Using Standard I/O for Database Files", in the WFDB Programmer's
	Guide.  This feature was broken in 10.4.5 as a side effect of changes
	in wfdb_open (an internal WFDB library function defined in
	lib/wfdbio.c).

10.4.8:
	New application convert/ahaecg2mit.c converts files from the AHA DB
	DVD into WFDB records.  (ECRI, distributors of the AHA DB, recently
	began shipping it on DVDs in a format incompatible with its previous
	formats.)

	Applications wrsamp and xform use rand() and srand() rather than the
	POSIX rand48() and srand48() to generate dither (the POSIX functions
	are not universally available).

10.4.7: 
	Yinqi Zhang reported and contributed a fix for a memory leak in
	make_vsd() (an internal WFDB library function defined in signal.c).

	Application nguess has new -m option that allows varying the
	threshold for inserting inferred sinus beat labels in its output.

	Applications wrsamp and xform can now add dithering to their
	inputs using a new -d option.

10.4.6:
	The WFDB functions setafreq() and getafreq() (for setting and getting
	the time resolution of newly-created output annotation files in ticks
	per second) were new in version 10.4.5, but were undocumented.  They
	are now described in the WFDB Programmer's Guide, and wrappers for
	these functions are now included in fortran/wfdbf.c.

	An important change in the WFDB library: memory allocation errors are
	now treated as fatal by default (in previous versions, the functions
	that encountered them returned error values that permitted the
	application to handle them).  These errors occur when there is
	insufficient memory available to the WFDB library.  To obtain the
        old behavior, in which the calling function will continue execution
        if possible after a memory allocation error, invoke wfdbmemerr(0).
        By default, however, such an error will cause the process to terminate.
        In either case, the WFDB library emits an appropriate error message to
        aid in troubleshooting.

	New macros for handling dynamically allocated memory are defined in
	lib/wfdblib.h and used throughout the WFDB library, eliminating most
	known memory leaks.  Three known leaks remain (in setecgstr, setannstr,
	and setanndesc);  these are documented and harmless in current
	applications.  Thanks to Yinqi Zhang for reporting a leak in copysi()
	(an internal WFDB library function defined in signal.c), which prompted
	the cleanup.
	
	WFDB functions strecg(), setecgstr(), strann(), setannstr(), and
	setanndesc() now handle NULL string inputs properly. (Previous versions
	passed NULL strings to strcmp(), with undesirable results.)

	A pair of new utility applications, signame and signum, convert signal
	numbers to signal names and vice versa.

	A new format converter, rdedfann, is included in convert/.  It extracts
	annotations from EDF+ files and writes them to the standard output in
	rdann output format.  After changing the EDF+ annotation mnemonics
	to WFDB mnemonics (using your favorite scripting language, such as
	perl or sed), wrann can then write a WFDB-compatible annotation file
	from the transformed text.

	wrann now works when creating annotation files for EDF and other
	multifrequency records.  The incompatibility between rdann's -x
	format and wrann has now been noted in the rdann and wrann man pages.

	rxr did not account properly for runs that are not followed by at
	least one beat annotation (common in the cudb).  Shibu Kallidukkil
	supplied an example that evoked this problem, which has now been
	corrected.

10.4.5:
	Bob Farrell and Tony Ricke chased down and provided fixes for memory
	leaks in several WFDB library functions, and also provided revisions
	to permit additional type checking and to avoid type mismatch warnings.

	Alexander Khaustov reported a bug in convert/ad2m.c and provided a fix
	for it.  The bug caused ad2m to truncate its output prematurely if the
        "-f" option had been used.

	Changes in the build system make it easier to build WFDB using Cygwin
	gcc (with or without the Cygwin POSIX library).

	Handle missing samples properly in pschart.c and psfd.c.

        Removed unused variables from app/wapb.c (thanks to Thomas Heldt).

	Corrected threshold update in app/wqrs.c, and added a check to avoid
	problems when the sampling frequency is too low.

	When creating annotation files, if the input sampling frequency differs
	from the frame rate of the input record (either because of using
	WFDB_HIGHRES mode while reading a multifrequency record, or because
	of having used setifreq() to modify the sampling frequency), a comment
	is written to the beginning of the annotation file indicating the
	resolution of the annotation times in ticks per second (thus allowing
	the application to store its annotations with whatever time resolution
	is desired).  When reading an annotation file, if such a resolution
	comment is found, getann adjusts the times of annotations to match the
	currently defined sampling frequency.  The resolutions are kept
	independently for each annotation file, so (for example) bxb can
	compare two annotation files written with different resolutions.

	The ability to set the time resolution of annotation files has required
	a minor change in the semantics of setifreq().  It is now necessary
	to invoke setifreq() before creating an annotation file that will
	have a resolution matching the (modified) input sampling frequency.
	Since setifreq() must be invoked after opening the input signals,
	this implies that wfdbinit() cannot be used to open both input signals
	and output annotation files if setifreq() is to be used;  rather, the
	sequence should be isigopen(), setifreq(), and finally annopen().

	If a string that includes a '.' is supplied to a WFDB library function
	where a record name is expected, the WFDB library assumes that it is
	the name of a file located in the WFDB path. If the name ends in '.hea',
	the file is assumed to be a WFDB-format header file, and its record name
	is assumed to be the first part of the string, exclusive of the '.hea'.

	This version also includes support for reading EDF files natively.
	If a string supplied as a record name contains a '.' but does not end
	in '.hea', it is assumed to be the record name of an EDF file of the
	same name.

10.4.4: Added 'collect.sh' script to 'conf', and 'collect' target to
	'make' template files (Makefile.tpl) to simplify creation of
	binary tarballs and RPMs.

10.4.3: Updated wfdb.spec (used to generate WFDB RPMs) to account for
	applications with compiled-in paths.

10.4.2:
	Mathias Gruber reported a line in wfdbio.c that used void pointer
	arithmetic (permitted as an extension by gcc but not allowed by
	ANSI/ISO C or most other C compilers).  This operation has been
	replaced by ANSI/ISO C-conformant code.

	Column headings produced using rdann's -v option are now correct
	even when the starting time, but not the starting date, has been
	specified in the input record's .hea file.

	Problems with compiled-in paths in several applications (wfdb-config,
	wavescript, pschart, and psfd) occurred as a result of Makefile
	bugs, which have now been fixed.

	Many minor documentation updates.

10.4.1: 
	A bug caused incorrect output from WFDB library function strtim()
	when called with the argument "i", following use of setifreq() to
	change the effective sampling frequency, resulting in incorrect output
	from example 10 in the WFDB Programmer's Guide.  This has now been
	corrected.

	Matt Osborn reported a bug in convert/ad2m that prevented proper use
	of the -f option when processing a compressed signal file.  [This was
	partially fixed in this version, but the fix introduced another bug,
	which was corrected in version 10.4.5.]

10.4.0:
	Version 10.4.0 and later versions of the WFDB library are intended to
	be compiled using ANSI/ISO C (and C++) compilers only;  previous
	versions also supported the use of traditional (K&R) C compilers.  The
	most obvious change resulting from this decision is in the use of
	prototypes in function declarations, an innovation of ANSI C that
	permits better error-checking by compilers.  The ANSI/ISO C standard is
	now more than 15 years old, and it has been over 10 years since a C
	compiler that does not support function prototypes was used for
	development of the WFDB library.  Code in wfdbio.c that provides
	limited support for compilers that do not provide an ANSI/ISO C library
	has been retained for now, and wfdb.h still includes a set of K&R C
	function declarations; both of these features are deprecated, however,
	and may be removed in future versions of the WFDB library.  Users who
	still need to use a K&R C compiler to compile the library itself may
	find 'unprotoize' (included in the GNU gcc distribution) to be helpful.

	The WFDB Fortran wrappers (fortran/wfdbf.c) have been revised for
	compatibility with gcc 4.x (which no longer supports -fwritable-strings
	as a way to convert between C and Fortran strings in place), and
	for compatibility with the new (experimental) Fortran 9x compiler,
	gfortran, which replaces g77 in gcc 4.x.  The revised wrappers remain
	compatible with g77 and with the even older f2c translator.
	
	The symbol WFDB_GVPAD is newly defined in <wfdb/wfdb.h>.  It may be
	added to WFDB_HIGHRES or WFDB_LOWRES and given as input to setgvmode().
	The effect of doing so is that missing samples, and samples recognized
	as invalid, are replaced by getframe (getvec) with the most recently
	read valid values rather than by the special value WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE.
	This behavior allows applications such as digital filters to remain
	ignorant of missing data without significant performance penalties.

	The mapping of lowest expressible sample values to WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE
	performed by getframe (in lib/signal.c) did not work properly for
	signal formats 80 and 160 (in which samples are recorded as unsigned
	integers);  this has now been corrected.

	The WFDB function 'sample()' now checks that its signal number input
	is valid, and returns WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE if not.

	WFDB applications nst and xform have been revised so that they
	correctly handle input that may contain invalid samples.  Programs
	revised to use WFDB_GVPAD mode are fir, mfilt, sigamp, sqrs, sqrs125,
	wabp, and wqrs;  all of these now also accept a '-H' option to read
	multifrequency records in high-resolution mode.

	Peter Domitrovich contributed an integration routine to memse to
	calculate power in bands of interest for HRV analysis.

	Example 7 in the WFDB Programmer's Guide now works properly.  The
	previous version always began processing the input at sample 0,
	regardless of start time specified in its argument list.

	The WFDB Applications Guide now documents the format of variable-
	layout records (in header.5).

	WAVE now handles the case of running on an X server that does not
	implement backing store more reliably. 	The code that was introduced
	in 10.3.16 did not behave properly with some X servers and window
	managers;  the latest version avoids this behavior.

	An installation bug caused WAVE not to read its default X11 resource
	file from the standard location in some cases.  The most visible
	effect was that the signal window background would appear grey
	rather than white.  This bug has been fixed.

	Hardware recommendations for WAVE have been updated in the WAVE
	User's Guide.

10.3.17:
	The WFDB library now supports reading variable-layout records
	(multi-segment records in which the number, arrangement, gains,
	and baselines of the signals may vary from one segment to the next;
	see 'Multi-Segment Records' in the WFDB Programmer's Guide).

	Rounding errors in the WFDB library's mstimstr function have been
	reduced.  Previous versions did not always round appropriately when
	the sampling frequency was much less than 1 Hz.

	The maximum length for a record name (WFDB_MAXRNL, defined in wfdb.h)
	has been increased from 11 to 20.

	A new constant, WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE, is now defined in wfdb.h.  It
	is used to identify padding inserted to fill in for missing data.
	When writing in any format that uses fewer than 16 bits per sample,
	putvec maps WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE to the lowest (most negative) value
	expressible in that format;  when reading a signal file in such a
	format, getframe performs the inverse mapping, so that missing data
	can be identified regardless of the data format.

	A side effect of this change is that (for example) any samples that
	had the most negative value (for example, -2048 in a format 212 signal
	file) are now flagged as invalid.  To treat such samples as invalid
	is reasonable, however, since these occur only when the input level
	falls below the working range of the analog-to-digital converter.

	'pschart', 'psfd', and 'wave' recognize this value, skip over missing
	data, and determine the position of each trace using the valid data
	only.  'rdsamp' also recognizes this value when using its '-p' option,
	indicating missing values as '-', and 'wrsamp' interprets a '-' token
	in its input as a missing value indicator to be written in its output
	as a sample with the value WFDB_INVALID_SAMPLE.  'xform' also
	recognizes and preserves this value in its output.

	'pschart' and 'psfd' process signal lists more cleanly (each '-s'
	option resets the signal list);  grid lines and other narrow lines
	are now 0.2 mm wide by default (earlier versions drew "zero width"
	lines that can be nearly invisible on modern high-resolution printers).

	An error in the psfd man page (doc/wag-src/psfd.1) has been corrected.

	'sumstats' now accepts certain valid inputs that previous versions
	rejected.

	A bug affecting signal highlighting in 'wave' was introduced in
	10.3.16, and has now been corrected.

	wave/soelim.c now works on the x86_64 architecture.

	The 'configure' script and the .def files in 'conf' have been
	revised, with several new options added to 'configure' (-m32,
	--without-netfiles, --withlibcurl, and --with-libwww.  'make all'
	(or simply 'make') builds and checks a complete test installation
	of the WFDB Software Package without affecting any previously installed
	version of the package (until now, 'make' has installed the WFDB
	library and its associated *.h files). The 'configure' script now
	automatically detects the x86_64 (AMD64) architecture under GNU/Linux,
	and sets up the Makefiles appropriately (unless the '-m32' option
	is used to force 32-bit mode).

10.3.16:
	Benjamin Moody has added an interface between the WFDB library and
	libcurl as an alternative to the existing libwww interface, and has
	updated 'configure' and conf/*.def to search for and use libcurl if
	it is available.  The primary advantages of libcurl over libwww are
	that libcurl is smaller and faster, it supports access to
	password-protected files, and it is actively maintained.  Both
	libraries are freely available on all popular platforms.

	Isaac Henry has provided changes to WAVE that improve the behavior of
	the signal window if the X server does not provide backing store.

	Isaac has also updated 'configure' to support building a native
	MS-Windows version of the WFDB library using either Cygwin gcc or MinGW
	gcc.

	In wabp and wqrs, the variable 'signal' has been renamed (to 'sig')
	to avoid redefining a symbol appearing in signal.h under Mac OS X 10.4
	(thanks to Richard Piper for reporting this problem).

	A number of minor changes, mostly involving conditional use of
	malloc.h, stdlib.h, and string.h, were made to eliminate warnings
	from gcc 4.x.

	A small number of files that are no longer supported, including several
	MS-DOS utilities and makefiles, have been removed from this version of
	the WFDB Software Package.

10.3.15:
	Rules for generating the binary tarball for MS-Windows have been
	fixed so that the Cygwin DLLs are now included with correct
	permissions.

	Installation of shared libraries under GNU/Linux requires an extra
	step if SELinux is enabled (as under Fedora Core 2 and later);  this
	has been incorporated into conf/linux-slib.def.

10.3.14:
	Use rdann's new -v option to add column headings to its standard
	output.

	A gain dependency in wqrs has been removed.  As a result, wqrs
	now works better on low-resolution input than previous versions.
	The change results in occasional shifts of one sampling interval
	in the placement of annotations for typical (higher resolution)
	records, relative to previous versions.	

	The 'make' rules for creating a binary tarball have been improved,
	and when making one on the Cygwin platform, the Cygwin DLLs are now
	included automatically. 

	Guido Muesch reported that the WFDB library function getspf() did
	not always return correct results if the frame frequency does not
	have an exact representation as a double precision floating point
	number.  This problem has now been corrected.

	To simplify installation of the WFDB software package, wfdb-config
	has been moved from app to lib.

	Carlos AS Felgueiras provided a patch to correct several problems
	related to compiling the WFDB software package and building the
	WFDB rpms.

10.3.13:
	Using an indirect WFDB path (i.e., setting the WFDB environment
	variable to a value such as '@FILE', where FILE contains the
	desired path) was broken in WFDB library versions 10.3.9 through
	10.3.12;  it now works again, thanks to a patch contributed by
	Fred Geheb.  Fred also found and proposed a solution to a memory
	leak in pschart (also in psfd), which has now been fixed.

	A bug in xform caused incorrect output when processing multifrequency
	records in high-resolution mode (using xform's -H option), and a bug
	in mit2edf caused an attempt to access unallocated memory for some
	inputs.  Thanks to Joe Mietus for providing sample inputs that helped
	in identifying and resolving these problems.

10.3.12:
	A beta release of the WFDB_tools package is now available for testing.
	This package allows Matlab R13 users to use the WFDB library to read
	and write digitized signals and annotations such as those available
	from PhysioBank. The WFDB_tools functions are wrappers for the WFDB
	library, so that Matlab users can access the full range of capabilities
	offered by current and future versions of the WFDB library, including
	transparent access to data in a large and growing number of formats,
	whether stored locally or on remote web servers. The package was
	written and contributed by Jonas Carlson. It has been tested
	successfully under GNU/Linux and MS-Windows, and it should be portable
	to MacOS X and other platforms supported by Matlab R13.  Look for the
	WFDB_tools package on PhysioNet.

	Thanks to instructions provided by David Linker, and a port of the
	XView library by Logan Donaldson, WAVE can now be used under Mac OS X.
	No code changes were necessary;  it just works!

	It has long been possible to use WAVE to view sequence of the 'num'
	fields in an annotation file as a signal.  This is useful, for example,
	for visualizing a series of measurements applied to each beat in an
	ECG.  WAVE now supports changing the scale of the displayed signal,
	using the same controls as for ordinary signals.  Also, it is possible
	to define default scales for different types of measurements in the
	WFDB calibration database (data/wfdbcal), using the annotator name as
	the signal type.

	Some recent GNU/Linux distributions use a default color for window
	backgrounds that makes WAVE's grid invisible.  WAVE's resource
	(preference) file (wave/Wave.res) has been updated to work around this
	problem;  it also includes documentation of all other WAVE-specific
	settings that can be controlled via this file.  Portions of the WAVE
	User's Guide related to this subject have also been updated.

	Okko Willeboordse pointed out an incompatibility between the native
	MS-Windows API and the ANSI/ISO C library function 'mkdir', which is
	used by the WFDB library.  This does not present a problem when
	compiling the WFDB library using the supported Cygwin/gcc compiler
	under MS-Windows, nor does any related problem occur on any other
	platform.  It should now be a little easier to compile the WFDB library
	using unsupported compilers, thanks to a new MKDIR macro that hides
	the incompatibility (see lib/wfdblib.h0).

	Piotr Wlodarek initiated a discussion about memory leaks in the WFDB
	library, citing as an example the 'trivial example program in C' from
	the WFDB Programmer's Guide, which does not free memory it allocates
	in isigopen() when reading the signal specifications.  This problem
	can be avoided by invoking wfdbquit() in the example program, just
	before exiting.  Further discussion of this point has been added to
	the WFDB Programmer's Guide following the presentation of the 'trivial
	example', and in the description of wfdbquit().

	Thomas Heldt provided a sample input for `ihr', in which a misplaced
	annotation evoked a lengthy interval during which valid inputs were
	rejected.  This example stimulated a modification to the predictor
	used by ihr for outlier detection, in order to avoid such behavior;
	see comments in app/ihr.c for details.

	Using rdsamp's -v option causes it to print column headings based on
	the descriptions of the signals in the input record.  The default
	signal description as supplied by the WFDB library ('record XXX,
	signal N') is abbreviated to 'sig N', but previous versions did not
	do this consistently.

	Gains and scale factors can now be chosen independently for each
	signal when using wrsamp.

	The man page for xform (doc/wag-src/xform.1) now documents the -S
	option (thanks to Lucy Gibson for pointing out the omission).

10.3.11:
	Isaac Henry provided a fix for 'configure' to avoid a problem that
	may occur in a non-standard Cygwin installation. 

	In lib/signal.c, several bugs have been identified and fixed.  Thanks
	to Piotr Wlodarek, who found a buffer overrun in isigopen.  Also,
	isgsettime sometimes performed incorrect seeks on multifrequency
	records that had been opened in high-resolution mode;  this has been
	fixed, together with a related bug that caused the value returned by
	strtim("e") to be calculated incorrectly in some such cases.

	New signal types and units have been added to the WFDB calibration
	database (data/wfdbcal).

10.3.10:
	In version 10.3.9, the functions setannstr, setanndesc, and setecgstr
	(in lib/annot.c) did not contain necessary checks to avoid invoking
	strcmp with a NULL argument.  These checks have been added in version
	10.3.10.  Thanks to Thomas Heldt for reporting this problem.  In the
	internal function wfdb_addtopath (in lib/wfdbio.c), an extra character
	was appended when adding a component to the WFDB path (in version
	10.3.9 only);  this has also been corrected.

	WAVE now incorporates a simplified method for synchronizing multiple
	windows.  The WAVE version number has been changed from 6.6 to 6.7.

10.3.9:
	The WFDB library functions setwfdb, setannstr, setanndesc, and
	setecgstr now copy their input string arguments, so that it is
	no longer necessary for WFDB applications to keep these strings
	valid.  If you have created applications that rely on being able
	to modify these strings, it will be necessary to invoke the
	corresponding functions again before such changes will take effect
	within the WFDB library.

	Previous versions of the WFDB library function putinfo did not
	flush their output until either a new header file was created (via
	setheader or newheader) or the process exited.  This has now been
	corrected, and putinfo output is now flushed before putinfo returns.
	Thanks to Jonas Carlson for reporting this problem.

10.3.8:
	The WFDB library function setbasetime (in lib/signal.c) now properly
	accepts arguments specifying midnight (e.g., "0:0:0"), which previous
	versions rejected, and the function setheader (also in lib/signal.c)
	records such times correctly in the .hea files it creates.

	epicmp's new -I option allows exclusion of short episodes from all
	statistics (the -i option, which remains available, excludes such
	episodes from episode counts but includes them in duration tallies.)
	Also, previous versions of epicmp (formerly epic) output a "time of
	day"  string where "0.000" should have appeared if the input record had
	a defined base time.  This behavior has been corrected (thanks to
	Paul Albrecht for the bug report, and for suggesting and providing
	an implementation of the -I option).

	The bounding box for pschart output has been enlarged so that most
	signal labels will not be clipped.

	A new application, time2sec, converts a string in WFDB standard
	time format into a time interval in seconds.

	wfdbdesc now produces output even for records with no signals.

	Three highly condensed time scales have been added to those previously
	available in WAVE.

	Modified psd/hrlomb and psd/hrmem so that the plots they produce are
	power, not amplitude, spectra, as psd/hrfft produces.  All three of
	these scripts can now produce log-log and semi-log plots (make them
	by using the new "-l xy" or "-l y" options).

	psd/lomb can now accept input series of arbitrary length, and its -P
	option (for selecting a power spectrum rather than the default
	amplitude spectrum) is now properly documented in its man page.

	The -l option of psd/memse is now obsolete; memse can now accept input
	series of arbitrary length.

	Fixed bugs in convert/readid and convert/makeid.  These programs read
	and write AHA DB-format tape ID files.  The bugs were introduced in
	version 10.0.1 (!);  the programs should work properly again, if anyone
	still needs to use them.

10.3.7:
	Fixed a bug in xform, introduced in 10.3.4, that prevented xform from
	reading the output sampling frequency from the standard input.  Thanks
	to Thomas Heldt for the bug report.

10.3.6:
	The fix applied in isigclose() in 10.3.5 was incomplete but is now
	(really!) fixed.  Applications that use sample() should call wfdbquit()
	to be certain that sample's buffer is freed before exiting.

	Some long-standing problems in the code (in lib/wfdbio.c) that handles
	http range requests for NETFILES-enabled versions of the library have
	been partially addressed.  The underlying issue is that http servers
	do not always return the range of bytes requested;  when this happens,
	it is not difficult to determine that there is a problem, but it is
	tricky to figure out what to do about it.  Based on experiments with
	several different http servers, the strategy for handling such problems
	within the WFDB NETFILES code has been improved substantially, but
	there may be further room for improvement.

10.3.5:
	Fixed a bug in WFDB library function isigclose() (in lib/signal.c)
	that had caused sample()'s buffer to be freed inappropriately when
	switching segments in a multi-segment record.  Thanks to Dave
	Schaffer for the bug report and for a test case that illustrated
	the bug.

10.3.4:
	xform now handles input and output sampling frequencies that are not
	exact multiples of 1 Hz.

	Added SRCDIR definition in configure and conf/cygwin.def.

10.3.3:
	Fixed man page installation bug;  thanks to Joe Mietus for the bug
	report.

	Updated INSTALL (installation notes).

10.3.2:
	New applications wav2mit and mit2wav create WFDB-format records from
	files in the widely-used .wav audio format and vice versa.

	New application nguess estimates the locations of missing normal
	sinus heart beats in an annotation file.

	When running multiple WAVE processes started from a single command,
	it is now possible to update all of the signal windows by selecting
	a sample in the master signal window (using <control>+<middle mouse
	button>).

	WAVE now handles invalid entries in the signal list properly;  thanks
	to Joe Mietus for the bug report.

	Changed options in ann2rr to support more flexible output formatting.

	Fixed a WFDB library bug that caused annotation sorting to fail
	if a new header file had been written.  Thanks to Winton Baker for
	reporting this problem and for providing an example that illustrated
	the bug.

	Fixed a bug in mit2edf that caused a crash instead of printing help
	if no arguments were supplied on the command line;  thanks to Jesus
	Olivan for the bug report.

	Better input checking in edf2mit;  fixed bugs in handling of unusual
	signal lists.

	Fixed a bug in snip that caused a crash if -a was the last option
	on the command line;  thanks to Joe Mietus for the bug report.

	Fixed installation bugs in psd/hr* scripts and psd/Makefile.tpl.

	Corrected a documentation bug in WAVE's on-line help.

	Revised rpm.spec and rules (in Makefile.tpl) for creating RPMs.
	There are now separate wfdb, wfdb-devel, wfdb-app, wfdb-doc, and
	wfdb-wave RPMs.

10.3.1:
	Added a -W option to ann2rr to create 2-column output containing
	intervals in seconds and annotation mnemonics, and modified the
	interval calculations to avoid accumulated roundoff error.

	Fixed a bug that caused WAVE to crash when the main window was
	resized if the open record had 3 or more signals, and added two
	high-resolution time scales in modepan.c.

	Fixed a bug in edf2mit that caused crashes when using the -s option,
	and another bug in mit2edf that caused crashes when converting a
	record with a frame rate of less than 1 Hz.  Thanks to Jesus Olivan
	for reporting these problems and for providing test cases that were
	helpful in developing and testing the fixes.

	Wei Zong has contributed an arterial blood pressure pulse detector
	for continuous ABP signals, which has been added to the package
	(see wabp).

10.3.0:
	The WFDB Software Package has been ported to MacOS/X (Darwin),
	version 10.2 (the port should also work under 10.1 but this
	has not been tested and will not be supported).	

	It is now possible to generate a shared WFDB library (DLL)
	under MS-Windows using Cygwin/gcc.

	Fixed bugs in lib/signal.c that caused improper accounting of
	signal group numbers when reading from two or more records at
	the same time (as in 'nst'), a bug that caused a segfault in
	'nst', and a bug that referenced uninitialized memory in
	newheader() if nsig = 0.

	Added functions sample() and sample_valid() to the WFDB library
	(in lib/signal.c).  sample(s, t) returns the sample at time (sample
	number) t from signal s, handling all necessary buffering
	internally and allowing the caller to treat the signal file
	as a virtual array of randomly accessible samples.  sample_valid()
	can be invoked to check if the most recent value returned by
	sample() was valid (e.g., to see if the end of the input was
	reached).  For an example of the use of these functions, see
	app/wqrs.c .

	Use -p -p to obtain higher precision in 'rdsamp' output.

	New -w option for 'ann2rr' and 'rr2ann' for attaching annotation
	types to intervals.

	Fixed a subtle bug in 'bxb' that caused it to count matching
	annotations as mismatches in very rare circumstances when the heart
	rate exceeds 200 bpm.  The effect of this bug was only to cause
	a tiny fraction of correct detections to be counted as errors, and not
	to cause detector errors to be counted as correct.  Thanks to James
	Pardey for reporting the problem and for providing a test case that
	was useful for developing and testing the fix.  See the comments in
	'app/bxb.c' for details.

	The application formerly known as 'epic' has be renamed 'epicmp'
	(episode comparator), to avoid conflicts with a new but widely
	distributed IRC chat client named 'epic'.

	Conversion of floating-point values to integer samples has been
	modified to obtain better cross-platform consistency in psfd and
	wrsamp.

	Wei Zong's length-transform-based QRS detector, wqrs, has been
	added to the package.

	New 'mit2edf' application converts records to European Data Format.

	Numerous updates in the WFDB Applications Guide.

10.2.9:
	Fixed a bug in example 9 in the WFDB Programmer's Guide (introduced
	in version 10.2.0).

	Updated lib/wfdbdll.def and the 'Makefile.dos' files in several
	directories.  These have not been tested in recent years and may
	need further revisions;  feedback is welcome.

	Corrected persistent problems with generating PDF versions of the
	manuals for the desired page size, and added hyperlinks to the
	PDF version of the WFDB Programmer's Guide.

10.2.8:
	Fixed a bug in WAVE that occasionally caused a crash when starting
	up;  also repaired a broken link in WAVE's on-line help.

10.2.7:
	Added a workaround to wfdb_fclose() (in lib/wfdbio.c) so that
	closing stdin after using freopen doesn't trigger a core dump.

	If out-of-order annotations were written and automatic annotation
	sorting was suppressed, the warning produced by oannclose() (in
	lib/annot.c) once again includes the correct 'sortann' command
	needed to put the annotations into order.  (This feature was broken
	by a previous revision.)

	Added 'ahaconvert', a shell script (in convert) that can reformat
	all (or any subset) of the records on an AHA DB CD-ROM using a2m
	and ad2m.  'a2m' and 'ad2m' now do a better job of automatically
	recognizing their input file types, and 'ad2m' now converts
	long-format as well as short-format AHA .CMP (signal) files
	correctly.

	Numerous updates and corrections in the WFDB Applications Guide.
	
10.2.6:
	Added setifreq() and getifreq() to the WFDB library.  setifreq
	allows the caller to resample an input record at any convenient
	sampling frequency, using getvec() to perform xform's resampling
	algorithm transparently.  Thanks to Pat Hamilton for the inspiration!
	The complementary getifreq returns the current getvec frequency
	(either the native sampling frequency of the current record, or
	the frequency previously set using setifreq()).  Times expressed
	in sample intervals passed to or from other WFDB functions (getann,
	putann, timstr, mstimstr, strtim) are rescaled to match the intervals
	corresponding to the chosen frequency.

	'sqrs' and 'sqrs125' now use setifreq() to resample their inputs.

	Added 'wfdb-config', a tiny program (in app) that reports the WFDB
	library version and linking information (similar to libwww-config,
	gtk-config, etc.).

	The WFDB library now records the base time with millisecond precision
	(previous versions did so with one-second precision), and 'xform'
	provides starting times to the library function 'setbasetime' with
	millisecond precision.  Thanks to Allavatam Venugopal for providing
	examples that illustrated the need for these features.

	Fixed handling of absolute time strings in 'ann2rr', 'bxb', 'epic',
	'fir', 'ihr', 'mxm', 'pscgen', 'rdann', and 'rxr' (all in app).

	Fixed deskewing buffer initialization in getframe() (in lib/signal.c).
	broken by the 10.2.0 update, which introduced an infinite loop when
	reading a record that requires skew correction starting at sample 0.
	Thanks to Andrew Walsh for finding an example that triggered this bug.

	Fixed rounding errors in adumuv(), muvadu(), and physadu() (all in
	lib/signal.c).  Previous versions rounded negative values toward zero;
	to obtain consistent conversions, however, it is necessary to round
	all values down (e.g., from -1.5 to -2 rather than up to -1).

	Fixed a memory leak in wfdb_fclose() (in lib/wfdbio.h), and made
	additional minor changes for portability (in lib/calib.c, lib/signal.c,
	and lib/wfdblib.h).  Thanks to Ion Gaztañaga for bug reports, for his
	careful notes on compiling the WFDB library using Borland C++ Builder
	(see INSTALL for a summary), and for testing intermediate versions
	of the library.

	Fixed a bug in checkpkg/appcheck, which was correctly testing xform
	with NETFILES and reporting any errors, but was not counting errors
	in this test.

10.2.5:
	New output format options in 'ann2rr' and 'ihr'.

	FreeBSD support in 'configure', new conf/freebsd* (thanks to
	Giuseppe Pagnoni).

	Added support for annotation maps from wfdb/ecgmap.h to the Fortran
	wrappers (fortran/wfdbf.c) and fixed two typos there.

	Removed unneeded references to wfdb/wfdb.h from waverc/wave-remote.c
	and waverc/wavescript.c (thanks again to Giuseppe Pagnoni).

10.2.4:
	Bug fixes in 'pschart' and 'psfd' (vbuf was not properly initialized
	before its first use).

10.2.3:
	Portability fixes in 'configure', 'install.sh', 'wave/Makefile.tpl',
	'psd/hr*', 'doc/*.sh', 'lib/wfdblib.h', and 'checkpkg/*check'.

	Updated 'checkpkg/appcheck' to use WFDBANNSORT when testing 'sortann'.

	The full package is now much smaller because the figures for the
	WAVE User's Guide are now generated as needed from compressed ppm
	files.  Also, 'doc/texindex.c' and 'doc/texi2html' have been removed
	from the package (these are now more widely available than when they
	were originally included, and relatively few users need them).

	Added rules for creating 'dbu.hlp' (MS-Windows help file version of
	the WFDB Programmer's Guide) to doc/Makefile.tpl.  Updated rules for
	generating the info version of the Programmer's Guide.

	Special pipe and tape header files from 'data' are now installed
	by default.

	Added rules for creating WFDB source and binary RPMs to the top-level
	Makefile.tpl.

10.2.2:
	WAVE can now be used to view and edit annotations for records that
	have no signals.

	The WAVE User's Guide has been moved to the 'doc' directory, and
	the process of formatting it is now better integrated with that for
	the other WFDB guides.

	In 'ihr', the use of an uninitialized variable ('lasttime') caused
	some non-outlier data in the first few samples to be rejected
	incorrectly.  This has now been fixed.

10.2.1:
	Most users will no longer need to set the WFDB path explicitly, as a
	result of several minor changes in the default path and in the
	installer for the WFDB Software Package.

	The environment variable WFDBNOSORT was replaced by WFDBANNSORT, and
	the environment variable WFDBGVMODE was introduced (see 'Annotation
	Order' and 'Multi-Frequency Records', in the WFDB Programmer's Guide,
	for details).

10.2.0:
	The 10.2 series differs from all earlier releases in that the WFDB
	library no longer imposes any fixed limits on the numbers of annotators
	or signals that can be open simultaneously.  There is also no
	fixed limit on the number of samples per signal per frame.  The
	constants WFDB_MAXANN, WFDB_MAXSIG, and WFDB_MAXSPF, which determined
	these limits in previous versions of the library, are still defined in
	lib/wfdb.h for compatibility with older programs that use them, e.g.,
	to set array sizes.

	In this release, almost all of the WFDB applications, including WAVE,
	those in the 'app' and 'examples' directories, and convert/edf2mit,
	have been revised so that they can handle arbitrary numbers of signals
	and (where applicable) annotation files.  The exceptions are:

	  sample
	    limited by the number of channels provided by the ADC/DAC it uses
	  view, wview
	    use 'gtkwave' (http://www.physionet.org/physiotools/beta/gtkwave)

	Also please note the new 'checkpkg' directory, which contains a variety
	of tests to check the basic functionality of the WFDB library and many
	of the WFDB applications.  From the base directory, run the tests by:

		make check

	These tests will check the currently installed version of the WFDB
	software package.  If you use them to check an old version, there may
	be minor discrepancies because of changes in the output formats;  you
	should not encounter any discrepancies if you use these tests after
	installing this version of the WFDB software package.

	As always, your comments are welcome!

	George (george@mit.edu)
